# HG002 project

The [HG002 project](https://github.com/marbl/HG002) page contains detailed information about the
project and sequencing technologies that were used to assemble the reference.

## Prepare the HG002 reads for sampling

If not already, make sure that the following prerequisite binaries are installed in environment:

```Bash
mamba install -c bioconda sra-tools minimap2 seqkit
```

In order to prepare the data for sampling we can use a set of scripts. In the instructions, we are assuming
that the project data is located under `$data_dir` directory (default configuration is '/data').
Also, the assumption is that there is directory `references`, with already downloaded `hg002` reference
(`hg002_v1.0.1.fa.gz` file). This can be easily achieved by running the following command in the repo root:

```Bash
python src/reference.py reference/species=hg002
```

First create a scratch folder and copy the scripts there from this repo:

```Bash
mkdir /data/scratch && cd /data/scratch
cp $PROJECT_ROOT/scripts/sampling/hg002/*.sh .
```

We need to download the reads first. This creates `fastq` directory with file blobs containing reads.

```Bash
bash download_hg002_reads.sh
```

Next thing we do is creating a reference mapping index, using recommended settings for hifi reads.
The output is index stored in `ref.mmi` file which we use in a subsequent step.

```Bash
bash index_hg002.sh
```

Once we have the index, we can align the reads to reference. This step produces alignments in `PAF`
format and saves them to local `paf` directory.

```Bash
bash align_reads_to_chm13.sh
```

Finally, we are able to produce the chromosome mapped reads. In the last step we are using alignments
to create index, so that we can map reads from blobs to respective chromosomes. These files are stored
in `mapped` directory, per chromosome.

```Bash
bash extract_map_chm13.sh
```

The contents should be copied (or moved) to the `reads` directory:

```Bash
cp -r $data_dir/scratch/mapped $data_dir/references/homo_sapiens/hg002_v1_0_1/reads
```

The directory structure should look something like this:

```Bash
-> (hg002_v1_0_1) tree reads/ | head -n 16
reads/
├── chr1_MATERNAL
│   ├── HG002-rep1
│   │   └── chr1_MATERNAL.fastq
│   ├── HG002-rep2
│   │   └── chr1_MATERNAL.fastq
│   ├── HG002-rep3
│   │   └── chr1_MATERNAL.fastq
├── chr1_PATERNAL
│   ├── HG002-rep1
│   │   └── chr1_PATERNAL.fastq
│   ├── HG002-rep2
│   │   └── chr1_PATERNAL.fastq
│   ├── HG002-rep3
│   │   └── chr1_PATERNAL.fastq
├── chr10_MATERNAL
...
```
